---
layout:     post
title:      "Dual Book Discussion on Political Development and Faith"
date:       2018-11-03 10:00:00
permalink:  2018/11/03/book-review-political-order-faith/
---

I finally read two books that were on my agenda for a long time: [Francis
Fukuyama][1]'s 2010 history book *The Origins of Political Order: From Prehuman
Times to the French Revolution* and [Jimmy Carter][2]'s personal memoir *Faith:
A Journey for All*. Reading these books took way longer than it should have, due
to a research deadline. Fortunately, that's in the past and I have pleasantly
gotten back to reading too many books and spending too much time blogging.

Before proceeding, here's a little background on Francis Fukuyama.  It is
actually tricky to succinctly describe his career. I view him a political
scientist and author, but he has additionally been a professor, a senior fellow,
a council member, and probably ten other things, at a variety of universities
and think tanks related to the development of democracies.  His most well-known
work is the 1992 book *The End of History and the Last Man*, where he argues
that liberal democracy represents the final, evolved form of
government.[^havent] Some events since the 1992 book --- off the top of my head,
9/11, Radical Islam and ISIS, political populism, the rise of unaccountable
and authoritarian governments in Russia and China --- have made Fukuyama a
frequent punching bag by various commentators. For one perspective, [check out
this recent New Yorker article][5] for some background (and unsurprisingly,
criticism) on Fukuyama, though that piece is mostly about Fukuyama's [2018 book
on identity politics][9] and doesn't make much reference to the book I will soon
discuss on political development.

Fukuyama is also associated with the rise of neoconservatism, to which he
distanced himself from due to the Iraq war. How do we know? [He literally says
so in a Quora answer][6].[^honest] Ah, the wonders of the modern world and those
"verified accounts" we see on Quora, Twitter, and other social media outlets!

Meanwhile, the second author whose book I will soon discuss, Jimmy Carter, needs
no introduction. He served as the 39th President of the United States from 1977
to 1981.

You might be wondering why I am discussing their books in the same blog post.
The books are different:

- Fukuyama's book is dense and scholarly, a 500-page historical account spanning
  from --- as the subtitle makes clear --- *prehuman times* to the French
  Revolution (1789-ish).  *The Origins of Political Order* includes historical
  commentary on a variety of European countries, along with China, India, and
  the occasional detour into the Middle East, Latin America, and other areas.
  It frequently references other scholarly works that Fukuyama must have
  reviewed and digested in his long career.

- Carter's book, in contrast, is a brief personal memoir, and weighs in at
  around 160 pages. It describes his view of religion and how it has shaped his
  life, from his youth to his Navy service, to his time as president, and
  beyond.[^carter]

Yet, they have an interesting common theme.

First, consider *The Origins of Political Order*. It is a book describing how
humans came to organize themselves politically, from forming small tribes and
then later creating larger kingdoms and states. Fukuyama repeatedly refers to
the following three political institutions:

- **The State**: government itself, which in particular, needs to consolidate
  and control power.
- **Rule of Law**: effective legal institutions that constrain what all people
  (most importantly, leaders!) can and cannot do.
- **Accountable Government**: having democratic elections to ensure leaders can
  be voted out of office.

He argues that successful, modern, liberal democracies (the kind of states I
want to live in) combine these three institutions in *an appropriate balance*,
which itself is an enormously challenging task. In particular, the pursuit of a
strong state seems to be at odds with rulers and elected leaders being bound by
a rule of law and accountable government.[^parallels]

*The Origins of Political Order* attempts to outline the history, development,
and evolution[^evolution] of these three institutions, focusing on factors that
result in their formation (or decay). It does not attempt to describe a general
"rule" or a set of instructions for the oft-used "Getting to Denmark" goal.
Fukuyama believes that it is futile to develop clear theories or rules due to
the multitude of factors involved.

If there is any "clear rule" that I learned from the book, it is that *political
decay*, or the weakening of these institutions, is a constant threat to be
addressed. Fukuyama invokes *patrimonialism*, the tendency for people to favor
family and friends, as the prime factor causing political decay.  He makes a
strong case. Patrimonialism is natural, but doing so can lead to weaker
governments as compared to those using more merit-based, impersonal systems to
judge people. China, Fukuyama argues, was a pioneer in applying merit-based
rules for civil service employees. Indeed, Fukuyama refers to China (and *not*
Greece or Rome) as having built the first modern state.
 
The book was a deep dive into some long-term historical trends --- the kind that
I like to read, even if it was a struggle for me to weave together the facts.
(I had to re-read many parts, and was constantly jotting down notes with my
pencil in the book margins.) I was pleasantly reminded of *Guns, Germs, and
Steel* along with *The Ideas that Conquered the World*, both of which I greatly
enjoyed reading three years ago. I would later comment on them [in a blog
post][4].

I hope that Fukuyama's insights can be used to create better governments
throughout the world, and can additionally lead to the conclusion he sought when
writing *The End of History and the Last Man*. Is Fukuyama right about liberal
democracy being the final form of government? I will let the coming years answer
that.

Do I *hope* Fukuyama turns out to be right all along, and vindicated by future
scholars? Good heavens. By God, *yes*, I hope so.

Now let's return to something I was not expecting in Fukuyama's book:
*religion*. (My diction in the prior paragraph was not a coincidence.) Fukuyama
discusses how religion was essential for state formation by banding people
together and facilitating "large-scale collective action".  To be clear, nothing
in Fukuyama's book is designed to counter the chief claims of the "new Atheist"
authors he references; Fukuyama simply mentions that religion was historically a
source of cohesion and unity.[^though]

The discussion about religion brings us to Carter's book.

In *Faith*, Carter explains that acquiring faith is rarely clear-cut. He does
not attribute a singular event which caused him to be deeply faithful, as I have
seen others do.  Carter lists several deeply religious people who he had the
privilege to meet, such as Bill Foege, Ugandan missionaries, and his brother.
Much of Carter's knowledge of Christianity derives from these and other
religious figures, along with his preparation for when he teaches at Sunday
School, which he still admirably continues to do so at 94. 

Carter, additionally, explains how his faith has influenced his career as a
politician and beyond. The main takeaways are that faith has: (1) *provided
stability* to Carter's life, and (2) *driven him* to change the world for the
better.

Some questions that I had while reading were:

- How do members of the same religion come to intensely disagree on certain
  political topics? Do disagreements arise from reading different Biblical
  sources or studying under different priests and pastors? Or are people simply
  misunderstanding the *same* text, just as students nowadays might
  misunderstand the same mathematics or science text?
  
  Here are some examples. In Chapter 2, Carter mentions he was criticized by
  conservative Christians for appointing women and racial minorities to
  positions in government --- where do such disagreements come from? Later, in
  Chapter 5, Carter rightfully admonishes male chauvinists who tout the
  Bible's passage that says "Wives, submit yourselves to your own husbands, as
  you do to the Lord" because Carter claims that the Bible later says that both
  genders must commit to each other equally. But where do these male chauvinists
  come from? In Chapter 6, Carter mentions his opposition to the death penalty
  and opposition to discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. Again,
  why are these straightforward-to-describe issues so bitterly contested?
 
  Or do differences in beliefs come *outside* of religion, such as from
  "[Enlightenment thinking][11]"?
  
- What does Carter believe we should do in light of "religious fundamentalism"?
  As Carter says in Chapter 2, this is when certain deeply religious people
  believe they are superior to others, particularly those outside the faith or
  viewed as insufficiently faithful. Moreover, what are the appropriate
  responses for when these people have political power and invoke their
  religious beliefs when creating and/or applying controversial laws?

- What about the ages-old question of science versus religion? In Chapter 5,
  Carter states that scientific discoveries about the universe do not contradict
  his belief in a higher being, and serve to "strengthen the reverence and awe
  generated by what has already become known and what remains unexplained." But, 
  does this mean we should attribute all events that we can't explain with
  science by defaulting to God and intelligent design? In addition, this also
  raises the question as to whether God *currently* exists, or whether God
  simply *created* the universe by gestating the Big Bang but then took his (or
  her??) hands permanently off the controls to see --- but not influence ---
  what would happen. This matters in the context of politicians who justify God
  for their political decisions. See my previous point.

Despite my frequent questions, it was insightful to understand his perspective
on religion.  Admittedly, I don't think it would be fair to expect firm answers
to any of my questions.

I am a non-religious atheist,[^first] and in all likelihood that will last for
the remainder of my life, unless (as I [mentioned at the bottom of this earlier
blog post][4]), I observe evidence that a God currently exists. Until then, it
will be hard for me to spend my limited time reading the Bible or engaging in
other religious activities when I have so many competing attentions --- first
among them, developing a general-purpose robot.

I will continue reading more books like Carter's *Faith* (and Fukuyama's book
for that matter) because I believe it's important to understand a variety of
perspectives, and reading books lets me scratch the surface of deep subjects.
This is the most time-efficient way for me to obtain a nontrivial understanding
of a vast number of subjects.

On a final note, it was a pleasant surprise when Carter reveals in his book that
people of a variety of different faiths, including potentially atheists, have
attended his Sunday School classes. If the opportunity arises, I probably would,
if only to get the chance to meet him. Or perhaps I could meet Carter if I get
on [a commercial airplane that he's flying on][10]. I would like to meet people
like him, and to imagine myself changing the world as much as he has.

Since I currently have no political power, my ability to create a positive
impact on the world is probably predicated in my technical knowledge.  Quixotic
though it may sound, I hope to use computer science and robotics to change the
world for the better. If you have thoughts on how to do this, feel free to
contact me.

<hr>

[^carter]: Carter has the longest post-presidency lifespan of any US president
    in history.

[^evolution]: My word choice of "evolution" here is deliberate. Fukuyama
    occasionally makes references to Charles Darwin and the theory of evolution,
    and its parallels in the development of political institutions.

[^havent]: I have not read *The End of History and the Last Man*. Needless to
    say, that book is high on my reading agenda. Incidentally, it seems that a
    number of people knowledgeable about history and foreign affairs are aware
    of the book, but have not actually read it. I am doing my best to leave this
    group.

[^honest]: Let's be honest: leaving the neoconservatism movement due to the Iraq
    war was the right decision.

[^parallels]: There are obvious parallels in the "balance" of political
    institutions sought out by Fukuyama, and the "checks and balances" designed
    by the framers of the American Constitution.

[^though]: I do not think it is fair to criticize the New Atheist claim that
    "religion is a source of violence". I would be shocked if Dawkins, Harris,
    and similar people, believe that religion had no benefits *early on during
    state formation*. It is more during the present day when we *already* have
    well-formed states that such atheists point out the divisiveness that
    religion creates.

[^first]: In addition, I am also an ardent defender of free religion.

[1]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Francis_Fukuyama
[2]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jimmy_Carter
[3]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Samuel_P._Huntington
[4]:https://danieltakeshi.github.io/2015-12-28-my-three-favorite-books-i-read-in-2015/
[5]:https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2018/09/03/francis-fukuyama-postpones-the-end-of-history
[6]:https://www.quora.com/What-influenced-Francis-Fukuyamas-departure-from-neo-conservative-ideology
[7]:https://aeon.co/essays/was-francis-fukuyama-the-first-man-to-see-trump-coming
[8]:https://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/world/was-democracy-theorist-francis-fukuyama-right-all-along/article576650/
[9]:https://www.amazon.com/Identity-Demand-Dignity-Politics-Resentment/dp/0374129290
[10]:https://thehill.com/blogs/in-the-know/in-the-know/337381-jimmy-carter-greets-every-passenger-on-flight-from-atlanta
[11]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enlightenment_Now
