---
layout:     post
title:      "Admitted to Berkeley? Congratulations, But ..."
date:       2018-03-10 23:00:00
permalink:  2018/03/10/admitted-to-berkeley-congratulations/
---

As I write this post, UC Berkeley is hosting its "visit days" program for
admitted EECS PhD students. This is a three-day event that lets admitted
students see the department, meet people, and get a (tiny) flavor of what
Berkeley is like. Those interested in some history may enjoy [my blog post about
visit days four years ago][2].

If you're an admitted student, *congratulations*! It's super-competitive to get
in. When I applied, [the acceptance rate was roughly 5 percent][1], and the
competition has probably increased since I applied. This is definitely true for
those applying to work in Artificial Intelligence. I've seen statistics from
BAIR director Trevor Darrell showing that the number of AI applicants has
*soared* in recent years, to the point where the corresponding acceptance rate
is now *less than three percent*.

It's technically true that you're not tied to a specific area when you apply,
and that's what the department probably advertises to admitted students. Do not,
however, take this as implying that you can apply in an area you're not
interested in but think is "less competitive" and then pivot to AI.  If you want
to do fundamental AI research (and not just use it in an application) you must
apply in AI --- otherwise, I highly doubt the faculty will be interested in
working with you when they already have the cream of the crop to consider from
other applicants.

That being said, here are some related thoughts regarding graduate school, visit
days, and so forth, which might be of use to admitted students:

- *You must come to visit days*. You will learn a lot about the professors who
  are interested in working with you based on your assigned one-on-one meetings.
  I don't know the details on how those assignments are made, but it's a good
  bet that if a professor wants to work with you, then you'll have a one-on-one
  meeting with him or her.

- On a related note, if there's a faculty member you desperately want to work
  with, then not only do you need to talk to him or her during visit days, you
  also need a *firm commitment* that he or she is willing to advise you without
  qualifications. This is particularly true for the "rock-star" faculty such as
  [Pieter Abbeel][3] and [Michael I. Jordan][4], the best of the best, who get
  swarmed with emails from top-tier students asking to work with them. Get
  commitments done early.

- You also want to be in touch with the students in your target lab(s). If you
  accept your offer, *consistently* communicate with them well before the
  official start of your PhD.  This might mean just occasional emails over the
  summer, or (better) being remotely involved in an ongoing research project
  that can lead to a fast paper during your first semester.  The point is, you
  want to be in the loop in what the other students are doing. This also
  includes incoming students --- you'll want to take the same classes as those
  in your research area, so that you can collaborate on homework and (ideally)
  research.

These previous points imply the following: you do *not* want to be spending your
first year (or two) trying to "explore" or "get incubated" into research. Your
goal must be to do outstanding research in your area of interest *from day one*.

It's easy to experience euphoria upon getting your offer of admission. I don't
mean to rain on this, but there's life beyond getting the admitted offer, and
you want to make a sound and informed decision on something that will impact you
forever. Again, if you got accepted to Berkeley, congratulations! I hope you
seriously consider attending, as it's one of the top computer science schools.
Just ensure that you were *admitted to your area of interest*, and furthermore,
*it is crystal clear* that the professors who you want to work with are willing
to advise you from day one.

[1]:https://danieltakeshi.github.io/2014/08/31/berkeley-orientation/
[2]:https://danieltakeshi.github.io/2014/03/28/graduate-school-visit-3-the-university-of-california-at-berkeley/
[3]:https://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/~pabbeel/
[4]:https://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/~jordan/
